This is a test. This is an interview with Dr.
Trevino, Doctor of Veterinary Medicine. Today's
date is June 12th, 1980. This is Terry Anderson.
This is a test.
This is an interview with Dr. Gerberto Trevino,
Department of Veterinary Pathology, Texas A&M
University, one of the series of the oral history
project concerning the College of Veterinary
Medicine. Today is June 12, 1980, and this is Terry
Anderson. Could you tell us about your early life?
You were born in Laredo, or grew up in Laredo. I was
born in Laredo, and I was one of six boys born to my
mother.
No girls.
My father was a rancher in South Texas. So I
acquired a love for animals at a very early age in my
existence. What type of ranch? It was a 2,640
acres cattle ranch. He also operated a dairy. It
was a Jersey dairy. And so that's where I was born
and reared, in this type of environment. What type
of cattle? He had in his dairy only jerseys, and for
beef he raised breamons.
Ultimately crossing these, because the jerseys
were very good milkers and they were able to wean
some pretty heavy calves. As a matter of fact, we
still own, my brother and I own 640 acres in Webb
County. And I try to go back there maybe twice a year
or so. But that's the background. What happened to
the rest of the ranch? Well, we sold 2,000 acres in
1947.
I went to school in Laredo. And I graduated from
Martin High School there. That was the only high
school in Laredo at that time. When was that? When
did you graduate? I graduated in 1942.
And in September of that year, I entered A&M.
And it was my intent to be a chemical engineer. Why
did you come to A&M? Why did you choose A&M? Well, I
chose A&M, I suppose it was at the urging of one of my
high school teachers who was very influential in
my life. He was a chemistry teacher, and he thought
that I would do very well in chemical engineering,
but that wasn't my bag.
I stayed here. Was that one of your good fields in
high school? Oh, yeah. I did very well in chemistry
in high school and physics and math. And then I
attended A&M from September 1942
until the Marines called me. And I entered the
Marines in May of 1944. So you
were drafted then? I was drafted. Could you
describe the campus during the Second World War?
Well, you see, when I came here in 1942,
we had a total of enrollment, enrollment of around
6,500. I can't tell you with any degree of
precision about this. No, no, that's about right.
It's about 6,500. And of course, we were all boys.
And all the freshmen were assigned to specific
ROTC units. And I was assigned to be chemical
warfare. And each one of these units occupied
specifically designated dorms. And I lived in
dorm three
for a long time. And then at that time on this campus
there was a lot of activity on the part of the
military because they had a lot of people here who
were involved in what they called at that time the
Army Specialized Training Program, ASTP.
And these people were
college graduates who were inducted as privates
and who were attending
courses here on this campus. Some of them were
about to receive their degrees. Not all of them had
completed their degrees. Some of them, I suppose
they were in their final year or the final two
years.
Yeah, I think I would like to revise a little bit
what I told you. If I remember correctly, these
ASTP boys were picked for their senior ROTC and
inducted into the service. Some of them into the
Air Force, some of them into the Army. It was sort of
an officer's training school? Yes, they were
being trained in their final undergraduate years
by the service with the stipulation that upon
completion of their degree requirements, they
would enter the service and pay back some of this
time, see. That was the deal.
We had on this campus the Air Force candidates and
Army, but I don't recall having seen any Navy B-12
program people here. At any rate, when those
people went on to complete their degree
requirements, they were simply picked up and they
were compelled to serve for some time. That was the
intent, you see. But then, as you know, the war
ended in 1945 and a lot of those people were just
released without having to pay back any of this
time, only to be recalled at some later date, like
the Korean emergency.
So in those days now, we had a very strict
discipline here on this campus. The
upperclassmen was king, as you know, the senior.
We still had a lot of hazing. For example, what kind
of hazing? Well, I mean, the type of hazing we had
was in the strictest traditions of A&M at that
time. That is to say, the freshmen wore a fish
stripe on the cuff of their sleeve, on their shirt
sleeve, and they were not permitted to use the
sidewalks.
We had to function as room orderlies for the
upperclassmen, bring their mail, clean their
room, make out their laundry, take it to the
laundry, bring it back.
During mealtimes, we were compelled to give them
what they called meal service, and you as a
freshman could not partake of any food, you see,
until every upperclassman at your table had been
served. And those things, besides the board
beatings, we got a heck of a lot of board beatings,
you know. They used to break out a board and any
upperclassmen who outranked another one could
order a butt tear, see. They'd line them up and whip
everybody with a board. That was traditional and
it was very common. we uh we used to to march to each
meal there was no one at A&M here who was not in
uniform those people that attended A&M and were
unable to qualify for a commission because of some
physical disability wore on their collars here an
NM which meant non-military You see? But they
still lived in the military dorm. No kidding. Yes,
sir. Now the student population of A&M went down
from about 6,500 to about, I think it was about
2,500 during the war, basically because
young men were being drafted. Yes. Also, I didn't
know that it had reached that lower figure, but
A lot of, a lot of officers were being produced here
at this university. And this university produced
more officers than any other service academy in
the United States and any other military school.
As a matter of fact, as you well know, the
commanding general of Corregidor was an Aggie,
General George Moore. Now were you happy to be
drafted or did you want to continue? No, I wanted to
finish my undergraduate work, but unfortunately
the war was not looking too good in those days. They
deployed a lot of young men, and in those days when I
was called for active duty, I was given the choice
of serving in the Navy or the Marines. And I chose
the Marines. Why? Well, I chose Marines for many
reasons. I was attracted to the Marines because of
the stringent discipline that they exercised and
because I knew that the Marine divisions were
deployed in the Pacific, and I felt that if I
volunteered for the Navy, I don't like cold
climates, and I didn't know where I would serve, so
I knew that if I joined the Marines I would always
remain in a tropical or subtropical climate. And
because of the fact that I thought that my military
training at A&M, of which I had had two years, might
give me a chance to go to the Marine Officer's
Candidate School. And did it? No.
I was a private in the Marines, and after 17 months I
was promoted to PFC. I served in the Marines about
two years. Got out in 1946. Where were you
stationed? I was stationed on Guam. Well, I got my
boot training in San Diego, California. Then they
sent me to Guam, where the 3rd Marine Division was
based. the 3rd Marine Division had already
participated in two operations in Bougainville
and in Guam. So when we arrived there in December
1944, they were just cleaning up. The Japanese
stragglers still remained on the island. And from
that base on Guam, we participated in the invasion
of Iwo Jima, which was the hardest battle that the
Marine Corps had ever fought in its history. And
you were in that battle? I participated as a member
of the 9th Marine Regiment, and I was in the 1st
Battalion, Charlie Company.
We landed on that island on the 19th of February,
1945, and after a very, very severe battle in which
many Aggies died, some of whose names are on the
list outside of the Memorial Student Center, we
then secured the island on the 6th of April, and
then we returned to Guam. And then the war ended
that year, 1945. Were you in infantry then? Yes, I
was a machine gunner. Oh, really?
Then I was assigned, believe it or not, to the
Marine Corps headquarters in Washington, D.C.
And then... After Guam? After Guam. And in
February of 1946, I was released from the Marines.
My father at that time was dying of cancer, and he
subsequently died in November of that year. And
then in June of 47, I returned to A&M as a student,
this time as a pre-veterinary medical student. In
1948, I was accepted into the College of
Veterinary Medicine. I received my degree here in
1952. Okay, now let's go back a minute here. When
you came in 1942, what was your course of study?
Engineering? Chemical engineering, yeah. And
then why and when did you change? When I was in Guam,
my father bought a 2,000 acre ranch that I joined
ours. and uh he had so many cattle that
it caused me to reconsider and I wrote a letter to
Mr. H.L. Heaton who was registrar here from Guam
and I told him that I wanted to change my major from
C.H.E. chemical engineering to veterinary
medicine and he wrote me a nice letter and told me I
would have to go through a selection process and to
take a lot of pre-vet courses and all that. So it was
then established by 1940, 46,
47 that I would pursue a career in veterinary
medicine or at least in pre-veterinary medicine.
And, of course, I didn't know that I was going to be
selected the first time. I was working towards an
agricultural education degree as
a contingency in the event I were rejected by the
College of Animal Medicine. And then you go out and
teach? Agricultural education. But I was very
lucky to have been accepted the first time. Now,
can you tell me about the acceptance process?
Well, at that time, we had a committee. Did you have
interviews? Yeah, we had interviews. Everybody
was interviewed. And uh...
I remember some of the people on my committee. That
is to say, on the selection committee.
Dr. Jaggi, Dr. Burns, Dr. Sam Cruz,
and uh...
I believe it was those were three of my selection
committee members in 1948 and
uh the the questions that they ask you your
selection was based on not only on your grades but
also on the on the interview well they asked me for
example one of the questions that I remember
they're asking me is if you were selected for
admission to the College of Veterinary Medicine
would you choose to be a large animal practitioner
or a small animal practitioner and I think that
that same question is being asked today in some
form or another I don't know that but some of the
students that have been before the committee have
told me My answer to that question was that I didn't
know enough about veterinary medicine to make a
choice before I was even admitted into the College
of Veterinary Medicine. And that I would defer my
choice until I was in the third year of my
professional work. By that time I felt that I
should have enough information that would steer
me one way or another. And they accepted that
answer and they liked my, my, my candor
And I was selected. In my class there were a lot of
veterans. I would think so. Very highly
intelligent people. And I was very fortunate to be
accepted because I was in with a lot of people who
who had demonstrated academic ability.
Now, did you eventually get your bachelor's
degree? No. No, I came very close to getting a
bachelor's degree in ag education. The only thing
that I lacked in order to complete my requirements
for a degree in ag ed were practice teaching. Oh,
really? Yeah, I took many, many courses in ag ed. I
enjoyed it very much. I've always enjoyed working
around county agents and agricultural people,
you know, having been born and reared in a rural
area.
And after I got out of here, in 1952, I wrote five
letters
applying for five different jobs, and I was
accepted by all five. Where were they? What type of
jobs? Well, they were all small animals, small
animals. I was accepted by one of the outstanding
practitioners in Miami, Florida, a fellow by the
name of Charlie Bild, B-I-L-D. He was...
he was a very highly respected small animal
practitioner, and and also by a man in Louisiana
who was an A&M graduate, and then also a doctor who
signed my license there, Dr. Childress. He was
practicing here in Texas, and he accepted me, but
the one that I was attracted to the most was
California, and I practiced in Hollywood,
California immediately after I got out of A&M. and
I had a lot of movie stars as my clients. I went, I
went in to work for an established older
practitioner who had two veterinary hospitals
and one of them was right across the street from the
Republic Studios on Ventura Boulevard and that's
where, that's where I went. I was very happy there.
Let's, let's go back to Now, I looked at the list of
commencement ceremonies from 1920, and the first
Mexican-American I found was a Ralph Gomez from
Bryan, who graduated in 1936, and now it seems like
he's in Tulsa, Oklahoma. And by the time you
graduated in 1952, it seems like you were only
about the fifth or sixth Mexican-American who
graduated here now we did have some Cubans and we
had some Puerto Ricans that graduated here and so I
was wondering uh why we have so few to begin with no I
I'm gonna have to disagree with you there because
there were a lot many more Mexican Americans than
that number that you quoted and I'm going to tell
you why I know that okay because you see we used to
have the Laredo A&M club and the Laredo A&M club was
made up were composed of Mexican-American
students primarily. But I'm talking about vet
school. Oh, in the vet school? In the vet school.
I'm not talking about A&M. Oh, you're probably
right there, as a matter of fact. I'm just talking
about— I know only one other. I'm just talking
about people who graduated with a doctorate. I'm
not talking about— The only other
Mexican-American that I know that is finished
from here, well, I'll bet that even today you won't
find half a dozen. Why?
Well,
that's a tough question to answer.
First of all, this fellow Gomez, when did he
finish? 1936. 1936. And I know that there was
another man by the name of Martinez from
Heavenville. I knew him personally. Oh, did you
know him? Yeah, he was the second one that I found in
1937. Yeah, that's right. That's exactly right.
He was, as a matter of fact, I called him several
times for veterinary assistance when I was
operating my father's dairy.
Yeah. That guy's a judge now, a county judge. Is he a
county judge? Yes, sir. Now, I personally taught
a Mexican-American here by the name of Garza. His
name was Gilberto Garza. He finished here in 1958.
Oh, okay. Well, I only went up to you. I only went up
to 1952. I didn't continue on. But why do you, let's
get back to that question. Why do you think there's
been so few Well I don't know how to answer that
question
I know that there have been a lot of
Mexican-Americans interested in veterinary
medicine but I suppose the reason the most obvious
reason is that that maybe their grades haven't
been good enough to entitle them to an interview
which is basal it's primal to to the selection of a
student for the professional curriculum is that
he that a grade point average be so high that he
merits an interview there's been a lot of people
here from Laredo that have tried to be
veterinarians they come across the same
obstacles that any other kid comes across I think I
really believe that the only way that we would have
a higher uh proportion of Mexican-Americans
entering the College of Veterinary Medicine is if
they were recruited at the high school level and
interested in veterinary medicine. And we don't
have a program like that, do we? To my knowledge,
no. To my knowledge, there isn't. I believe that we
would also have a higher percentage of blacks that
might be interested in veterinary medicine, but
to my knowledge this university doesn't have an
active recruitment program for minorities, and I
think that they should. I think that when people
tell me, well, the reason why Mexican-Americans
don't choose veterinary medicine as a career is
that they know they're not intellectually
qualified, and I consider that to be bullshit.
I myself was in the top ten percent of my class here.
And when I went to get a Ph.D., I finished number one
in my class at Michigan State. It's not that they
don't possess a mental aptitude. It's just that
they feel that the career is very long and maybe
they come from lower income families and maybe
they feel that they ought to select a career that
will enable them to get a job in four years. I don't
know what the reasons are. There's probably a
multiplicity of reasons. Yes, yes. Did you feel
when you came here, first as an undergraduate, and
then as one student of the vet school, did you feel
that you were discriminated against in any way?
Dr. Anderson, that business of discrimination on
this campus is rampant. It is today rampant, and in
those days it was worse. Can you give me some
examples? Oh, there's, there's so many, you know,
there's so many subtle ways in which
discrimination can be practiced. It is, it is
quite difficult sometimes to, to identify
specifically
the reason for the discrimination or the
instances of discrimination. I feel that, well,
You tell me a single Mexican-American on this
university campus that has any positional
responsibility. Name me one. I can't. I'm not an
expert. This state is composed of 30%
Mexican-Americans.
We don't have anybody here that's a
Mexican-American in positional
responsibility.
American in Hernandez, I think his name was. Danny
Hernandez. I think that's his name. But he's
supposed to be equal employment officer or
something like that.
But aside from that, I have gone through the
faculty
roster, to find out how many people here are
teaching at A&M that have a Spanish surname.
Now, just a short time ago, the office of the vice
president for academic affairs claimed that
there were 140 minority people. teaching here on
this university campus. A hundred and forty?
Yeah, but I've gone through that book there, and I
can only find about five or six with a Spanish
surname.
Oh, uh... Well, could you give me some examples
when you were here back in the, back in the 40s, and
then when you got here? Of discrimination? No.
Well, I guess one of the outstanding examples was a
fellow who was in my dorm. He was classified as a
junior. He's now, he became a veterinarian, you
know. That's ironic, you know. It really is
ironic. But in those days we were, you know,
teenagers. And this guy really had it in for
Mexicans. He said he had killed several of them on
his father's ranch. That's what he told me. He
couldn't tolerate them around him.
That fellow then went on to become veterinarian,
and the irony of this thing is that I became a member
of the teaching staff here, and we met at
professional conventions. As a matter of fact,
there was one guy in my class who never spoke to me
for four years, that we went together every day to
the same classes. Is this in vet school? In vet
school. The first one was in 1943 or 44. 44. That was
the first example. And this example is in vet
school. In vet school, yeah. He never spoke to me.
when we were see he he joined our class from the
class that was supposed to finish ahead of ours he
failed of course and therefore was uh was put back a
year you know and he joined our class now this guy I
don't know he he had it in for Mexican Americans and
of course
I never made any effort to cultivate his
friendship and we went like that for four years he
never spoke to me during four years we were here
except in the final month when our graduation was a
certainty then he